# Why Europe is rediscovering the virtues of cash

In a world of payment apps and digital euros, the coin is staging a modest comeback

Enter a church in Sweden in the bleak midwinter and you will find one of its recesses faintly aglow. A thicket of candles, lit by visitors commemorating a loved one, offers a break from the bustle of modern life. Once, such contemplative scenes were disturbed only by the sound of coins clinking into a metal box accepting donations for each candle. No longer. In these modern times, the candles remain but the cash box has often been replaced by a QR code. Instead of rummaging through their change purses, prospective candle-lighters zap a few kronor to the church through Swish, a ubiquitous payment app. The sound of coins against metal has been replaced by the dull buzz of mobile phones announcing that a payment has gone through.

Europe, or at least its northern bit, is the land that cash forgot. In Norway and Sweden coins and notes are vanishing into the past alongside Vikings and discontinued IKEA bedspreads. Swedes now use digital payments for 90% of all their purchases; only half use cash at all in any given month (Charlemagne, a frequent visitor to Sweden, has not seen a bank note there in well over a decade). Whereas the Japanese have paper and metal yen equivalent to 22% of their GDP stuffed into wallets and under mattresses (or futons), in Sweden the figure is under 1%.

Other bits of the continent are catching up. Cash more often remains the norm in southern Europe, where people are poorer and small businesses sometimes lack Scandinavians’ meticulousness in declaring all their income to the taxman. Germany and Austria have a lingering affection for physical money, valuing the privacy it offers in the face of once-repressive states. But even they are ditching cash. Europe has half as many ATMs per person as America does, and the number is falling. Banks hold so little cash in Denmark that robbers no longer bother sticking them up.

All this swishing money electronically from one account to another once looked like modernity incarnate—no matter the protests of buskers, beggars and tax-dodgers. Politicians have long pushed for more digital payments to help stamp out undeclared income and crack down on money-laundering. Greece forced businesses, including restaurants and taxis, to accept digital payments and issue receipts (although the card reader at the taverna might prove conveniently out of service when the bill arrived). The EU has mandated thresholds on cash usage, demanding national legislation banning the use of banknotes for large business payments. In 2019 the European Central Bank even stopped issuing new €500 ($584) notes. (The bill was so rarely seen, and so suspected of financing dodgy stuff, that it had become known as the “bin Laden”.) In European eyes cash was yesterday’s money, and digital payments the gleaming future.

Some protested, notably those on the populist right. They have long denigrated digital payments as a sop to banks (which profit from each card swipe); cash, they say, is a form of “printed freedom”. But consumers have voted with their wallets. Across the euro area cash was used for 79% of in-person transactions in 2016, but just 52% in 2024 (and accounted for a smaller share of value, because cards are preferred for larger payments). Coffee shops realised they could do brisker business by having punters tap their bank cards instead of shuffling bits of metal. Particularly after covid-19, payments in coins and notes became so rare in many shops as to no longer be worth it. An ever-growing number put out “no cash” signs: across Europe, 12% of all businesses flatly refused cash in 2024, up from 4% just three years earlier. In some countries the figure is higher. Over one in three cinemas in the Netherlands no longer accept notes and coins. Cash looked headed for a doom loop: fewer people were taking out euros because fewer shops accepted them, because fewer people use them, and so on.

Yet authorities now think electronic money may be too much of a good thing. They would like to see, if not a dash back to cash, then at least a way to ensure it continues as a ubiquitous means of payment. In 2021 a ruling from the top EU court affirmed that paper money should in principle be accepted. To remove all remaining doubt, in December ministers from the EU’s 27 member states reiterated their desire to ban businesses from refusing notes and coins. As part of a forthcoming law, shops and restaurants will still be able to indicate they prefer digital payments, but will need also to accept old-fashioned cash.

Why the seeming backtrack? One concern is that a sizeable minority are still digitally averse. Newfangled apps and PIN-locked cards are great for young and connected types, and tolerable for the middle-aged and mildly hapless. But for the elderly the experience of juggling bank cards and apps can be frustrating. Some poor people struggle to open bank accounts at all.

A more recent misgiving centres on the resilience of payment systems. Convenient as they are when things work well, getting money to move around ethereally requires electricity and a data connection. Spaniards facing nationwide power cuts last spring found themselves unable to buy food and other necessities. And what of threats from foreign adversaries? Some fret that too much digital payment leaves Europe dependent on the likes of Visa and MasterCard, American firms with unpredictable political masters. (The ECB is mulling a “digital euro” in response, though that will take years.) In the Baltics and Nordics, where angst focuses on Russian sabotage, digital payments systems now work for a time even when power is cut. But nothing beats cash when it comes to resilience. Swedes have long been advised to store enough in notes and coins to get through a week, a move the EU now recommends. After years of tapping and swiping to pay, Europe is discovering that some change is worth keeping. ■

Subscribers to The Economist can sign up to our Opinion newsletter, which brings together the best of our leaders, columns, guest essays and reader correspondence.

This article was downloaded by zlibrary from https://www.economist.com//europe/2026/01/08/why-europe-is-rediscovering-the-virtues-of-cash






